AFRICAN CHARTER ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES RIGHTS
PREAMBLE
The African states members of the organization of African unity parties to the present convention entitled 
"African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights"; 
Recalling decision 115 (XVI) of the Assembly of Heads of States and Government at its Sixteenth 
Ordinary Session held in Monrovia, Liberia, from 17 to 20 July 1979 on the preparation of "a preliminary 
draft on an African Charter on Human and Peoples' 
Rights providing inter alia for the establishment of bodies to promote and protect human and people's 
rights "; 
Reaffirming the pledge they solemnly made in Article 2 of the said Charter to eradicate all forms of 
colonialism from Africa, to co-ordinate and intensify their co-operation and efforts to achieve a better life 
for the peoples of Africa and to promote international co-operation, having due regard to the Charter of 
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; 
Taking into consideration the virtues of their historian tradition and the values of African civilization which 
should inspire and characterize their reflection on the concept of human and peoples' rights; 
Recognizing on the one hand, that fundamental human rights stem from the attributes of human beings, 
which justifies their international. protection and on the other hand, that the reality and respect of peoples' 
rights should necessarily guarantee human rights; 
considering that the enjoyment of rights and freedom also implies the performance of duties on the part of 
everyone; 
convinced that it is henceforth essential to pay particular attention to the right to development and that 
civil and political rights cannot be dissociate from economic, social and cultural rights in their conception 
as well as universality and that the satisfaction of economic, social and cultural rights is a guarantee for 
the enjoyment of civil and political rights; 
Conscious of their duty to achieve the total liberation of Africa, the peoples' of which are still struggling for 
their dignity and genuine independence, and undertaking to eliminate colonialism, neo-colonialism, 
apartheid, Zionism, and to dismantle aggressive foreign military bases and all forms of discrimination, 
particularly those based on race, ethnic group, colour, sex, language, religion or political opinion; 
Reaffirming their adherence to the principles of human and peoples' rights and freedoms contained in the 
declarations, conventions and other instruments adopted by the Organization of African Unity, the 
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the United Nations; 
Firmly convinced of their duty to promote and protect human and peoples' rights and freedoms taking into 
account the importance traditionally attached to these rights and freedoms in Africa; 
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
PART ONE
RIGHTS AND DUTIES
CHAPTER 1 Human and Peoples' Rights
Article 1
The Member States of the Organization of African Unity parties to the present Charter shall recognize the 
rights, duties and freedoms enshrined in this Charter and shall undertake to adopt legislative or other 
measures to give effect to them. 
Article 2
Every individual shall be entitled to the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms recognized and guaranteed 
in the present Charter without distinction of any kind such as race, ethnic group, colour, sex, language, 
religion, political or any other opinion, national and social origin, fortune, birth or other status. 
Article 3
1 . Every individual shall be equal before the law. 
2. Every individual shall be entitled to equal protection of the law. 
Article 4
Human beings are inviolable. Every human being shall be entitled to respect for his life and the integrity of 
his person. No one may be arbitrarily deprived of this right. 
Article 5
Every individual shall have the right to the respect of the dignity inherent in a human being and to the 
recognition of his legal status. All forms of exploitation and degradation of man particularly slavery, slave 
trade, torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment and treatment shall be prohibited. 
Article 6
Every individual shall have the right to liberty to the security of this person. No one may be deprived of his 
freedom except for reasons and conditions previously laid down by law. In particular, no one may be 
arbitrarily arrested or detained. 
Article 7
1. Every individual shall have the right to have his cause heard. This comprises: 
(a) the right to an appeal to competent national organs against acts violating his fundamental rights as 
recognized and guaranteed by conventions, laws, regulations and customs in force; 
(b) the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty by a competent court or tribunal; 
(c) the right to defence, including the right to be defended by counsel of his choice; 
(d) the right to be tried within a reasonable time by an impartial court or tribunal. 
2. No one may be condemned for an act or omission which did not constitute a legally punishable offence 
a the time it was committed. No penalty may be inflicted for an offence for which no provision was made 
at the time it was committed. Punishment is personal and can be imposed only on the offender. 
Article 8
Freedom of conscience, the profession and free practice of religion shall be guaranteed. No one may, 
subject to law and order, be submitted to measures restricting the exercise of these freedoms. 
Article 9
1. Every individual shall have the right to receive information. 
2. Every individual shall have the right to express and disseminate his opinions within the law. 
Article 10
1. Every individual shall have the right to free association provided that he abides by the law. 
2. Subject to the obligation of solidarity provided for in Article 29 no one may be compelled to join an 
association. 
Article 11
Every individual shall have the right to assemble freely with others. The exercise of this right shall be 
subject only to necessary restrictions provided for by law in particular those enacted in the interest of 
national security, the safety, health, ethics and rights and freedoms of others. 
Article 12
1. Every individual shall have the right to freedom of movement and residence within the border of a State 
provided he abides by the law. 
2. Every individual shall have the right to leave any country including his own, and to return to his country. 
This right may only be subject to restrictions, provided for by law for the protection of national security, 
law and public order, public health or morality. 
3. Every individual shall have the right, when persecuted, to seek and obtain asylum in other countries in 
accordance with the laws of those countries and international conventions. 
4. A non-national legally admitted in a territory of a State party to the present Charter, may only be 
expelled from it by virtue of a decision taken in accordance with the law. 
5. The mass expulsion of non-nationals shall be prohibited. Mass expulsion shall be that which is aimed 
at national, racial, ethnic or religious groups. 
Article 13
1. Every citizen shall have the right to participate freely in the government of his country either directly or 
through freely chosen representatives in accordance with the provisions of the law. 
2. Every citizen shall have the right of equal access to the public service of his country; 
3. Every individual shall have the right of access to public property and services in strict equality of all 
persons before the law. 
Article 14
The right to property shall be guaranteed. It may only be encroached upon in the interest of public need 
or in the general interest of the community and in accordance with the provisions of appropriate laws. 
Article 15
Every individual shall have the right to work under equitable and satisfactory conditions, and shall receive 
equal pay for equal work. 
Article 16
1. Every individual shall have the right to enjoy the best attainable state of physical and mental health. 
2. State parties to the present Charter shall take the necessary measures to protect the health of their 
people and to ensure that they receive medical attention when they are sick. 
Article 17
1. Every individual shall have the right to education. 
2. Every individual may freely take part in the cultural life of his community. 
3. The promotion and protection of morals and traditional values recognized by the community shall be 
the duty of the State. 
Article 18
The family shall be the natural unit and basis of society. It shall be protected by the State which shall take 
care of its physical and moral health. 
2. The State shall have the duty to assist the family which is the custodian of morals and traditional values 
recognized by the community. 
3. The State shall ensure the elimination of every discrimination against women and also ensure the 
protection of the right of the women and the child as stipulated in international declaration and 
conventions. 
4. The aged and the disabled shall also have the right to special measures of protection in keeping with 
their physical and moral needs. 
Article 19
All peoples shall be equal; they shall enjoy the same respect and shall have the same rights. Nothing 
shall justify the domination of a people by another. 
Article 20
1. All peoples shall have right to existence. They shall have the unquestionable and inalienable right to 
self-determination. They shall freely determine their political status and shall pursue their economic and 
social development according to the policy they have freely chosen. 
2. Colonized or oppressed peoples shall have the right to free themselves from the bonds of domination 
by resorting to any means recognized by the international community. 
3. All peoples shall have the right to the assistance of the States parties to the present Charter in their 
liberation struggle against foreign domination, be it political, economic or cultural. 
Article 21
1. All peoples shall freely dispose of their wealth and natural resources. This right shall be exercised in 
the exclusive interest of the people. In no case shall a people be deprived of it. 
2. in case of spoliation the dispossessed people shall have the right to the lawful recovery of its property 
as well as to an adequate compensation. 
3. The free disposal of wealth and natural resources shall be exercised without prejudice to the obligation 
of promoting international economic co-operation based on mutual respect, equitable exchange and the 
principles of international law. 
4. States parties to the present Charter shall individually and collectively exercise the right to free disposal 
of their wealth and natural resources with a view strengthening African unity and solidarity. 
5. States parties to the present Charter shall undertake to eliminate all forms of foreign economic 
exploitation particularly that practised by international monopolies so as to enable their peoples to fully 
benefit from the advantages derived from their national resources. 
Article 22
1. All peoples shall have the right to their economic, social and cultural development with due regard to 
their freedom and identity and in the equal enjoyment of the common heritage of mankind. 
2. States shall have the duty, individually or collectively, to ensure the exercise of the right to 
development. 
Article 23
1. All peoples shall have the right to national and international peace and security. The principles of 
solidarity and friendly relations implicitly affirmed by the Charter of the United Nations and reaffirmed by 
that of the Organization of African Unity shall govern relations between States. 
2. For the purpose of the straightening peace, solidarity and friendly relations, State parties to the present 
Charter shall ensure that 
(a) any individual enjoying the right of asylum under Article 12 of the present Charter shall not engage in 
subversive activities against his country of origin or any other State party to the present Charter; 
(b) their territories shall not be used as bases for subversive or terrorist activities against the people of 
any other State party to the present Charter. 
Article 24
All people shall have the right to a general satisfactory environment favourable to their development. 
Article 25
States parties to the present Charter shall have the duty to promote and ensure through teaching, 
education and publication, the respect of the rights and freedoms contained in the present Charter and to 
see to it that these freedoms and right as well as corresponding obligations and duties are understood. 
Article 26
States parties to the present Charter shall have the duty to guarantee the independence of the Courts 
and shall allow the establishment and improvement of appropriate national institutions entrusted with the 
promotion and protection of the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the present Charter. 
CHAPTER 2 Duties
Article 27
1. Every individual shall have duties towards his family and society, the State and other legally recognized 
communities and the international community. 
2. The rights and freedoms of each individual shall be exercised with due regard to the rights of others, 
collective security, morality and common interest. 
Article 28
Every individual shall have the duty to respect and consider his fellow beings without discrimination, and 
to maintain relations aimed at promoting, safeguarding and reinforcing mutual respect and tolerance. 
Article 29
The individual shall also have the duty: 
1. to preserve the harmonious development of the family and to work for the cohesion and respect of the 
family; to respect his parents at all times, to maintain them in case of need : -
2. to serve his national community by placing his physical and intellectual abilities at its service; 
3. not to compromise the security of the State whose national or resident he is; 
4. to preserve and strengthen the national solidarity, particularly when the latter is threatened; 
5. to preserve and strengthen the national independence and the territorial integrity of his country an to 
contribute to its defence in accordance with the law; 
6. to work to the best of his abilities and competence, and to pay taxes imposed by law in the interest of 
the society; 
7. to preserve and strengthen positive African cultural values in his relation with other members of the 
society, in the spirit of tolerance, dialogue and consultation and, in general, the contribute to the 
promotion of the moral well-being of society; 
8. to contribute to the best of his abilities, at all times and at all levels, to the promotion "and 'achievement 
of African unity. 
PART TWO 
MEASURES OF SAFEGUARD
CHAPTER 1 
Establishment and organization of the African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights
Article 30
An African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, hereinafter called "Commission", shall be 
established within the Organization of African Unity to promote human and peoples' rights and ensure 
their protection in Africa. 
Article 31
1. The Commission shall consist of eleven members chosen from amongst African personalities of the
high morality, integrity, impartiality and competence in matters of human and peoples' rights; particular 
consideration in being given to persons having legal experience. 
2. The members of the Commission shall serve their personal capacity. 
Article 32
The Commission shall not include more than one national of the same State. 
Article 33
The members of the Commission shall be elected by secret ballot by the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government, from a list of persons nominated by the States parties to the present Charter. 
Article 34
Each State party to the present Charter may not nominate more than two candidates. The candidate must 
have the nationality of one of the States parties of the present Charter. When two candidates are 
nominate by a State, one of them, may not be a national of that State. 
Article 35
1. the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity shall make an alphabetical list of the 
persons thus nominated and communicate it to the Heads of State and Government at least one month 
before the elections. 
Article 36
The members of the Commission shall be elected for a six year period and shall be eligible for re-election. 
However, the term of office of four of the members elected at the first election shall terminate after two 
years and the term of office of three others, at the end of four years. 
Article 37
Immediately after the first election, the Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of 
the Organization of African Unity shall draw lots to decide the name of those members referred to in 
Article 36. 
Article 38
After the election, the member of the Commission shall make a solemn declaration to discharge their 
duties impartially and faithfully. 
Article 39
1. In case of death or resignation of the member of the Commission, the Chairman of the Commission 
shall immediately inform the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, who shall declare the 
seat vacant from the date of death or from the date on which the resignation takes effect. 
2. If, in the unanimous opinion of other members of the commission, a member has stopped discharging 
his duties for any reason other than a temporary absence, the Chairman of the Commission shall inform 
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, who shall then declare the seat vacant. 
3. In each of the cases anticipated above, the Assembly of Heads of State and Government shall replace 
the member whose seat became vacant for the remaining, period of his term unless the period is less 
than six months. 
Article 40
Every member of the Commission shall be in office until the date his successor assumes office. 
Article 41
The Secretary-General, of the Organization of African Unity shall appoint the Secretary of the 
Commission. He shall also provide the staff and services necessary for the effective discharge of the 
duties of the Commission. The Organization of African Unity shall bear the cost of the staff and services. 
Article 42
1. The Commission shall elect its Chairman and Vice-Chairman for a. two-year period. They shall be 
eligible for re-election. 
2. The Commission shall lay down its rules of procedure. 
3. Seven members shall form the quorum. 
4. In case of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have a casting vote. 
5. The Secretary-General may attend the meetings of the Commission. He shall neither participate in 
deliberations nor shall be entitled to vote. The Chairman of the Commission may, however, invite him to 
speak. 
Article 43
In discharging their duties, members of the Commission shall enjoy diplomatic privileges and immunities 
provided for in the general Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Organization of African 
Unity. 
Article 44
Provision shall be made for the emoluments and: allowances of the members of the Commission in the 
regular Budget of the Organization of African Unity. 
CHAPTER 2
MANDATE OF THE COMMISSION
Article 45
The functions of the Commission shall be: 
1. to promote Human and Peoples' Rights and in particular; 
(a) to collect documents, undertake studies and research on African problems in the field of human and 
peoples' rights, organize seminars, symposia and conferences, disseminate information, encourage 
national and local institutions concerned with human and peoples' rights and, should the case arise, give 
its views or make recommendations to Governments; 
(b) to formulate and lay down, principles, and rules aimed at solving legal problems relating to human and 
peoples' rights and fundamental freedoms upon which African Government may base their legislations; 
(c) co-operate with other African and international institutions concerned with the promotion and 
protection of human and peoples' rights. 
2. Ensure the protection of human and peoples' rights under conditions laid down by the present Charter. 
3. Interpret all the provisions of the present Charter at the request of a State party, an institution of the 
Organization of African Unity or an African Organization recognized by the Organization of African Unity. 
4. Perform any other tasks which may be entrusted to it by the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government. 
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURE OF THE COMMISSION
Article 46
The Commission may resort to any appropriate method of investigation; it may hear from the 
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity or any other person capable of enlightening it. 
COMMUNICATION FROM STATES
Article 47
If a State party to the present Charter has good reasons to believe that an another State party to this 
Charter has violated the provisions of the Charter, it may draw by written communication, the attention of 
that State to the matter. This communication shall also be addressed to the Secretary-General of the 
Organization of African Unity and to the Chairman of the Commission. Within three months of the receipt 
of the communication the State to which the communication is addressed shall give the enquiring State, 
written explanation or statement elucidating the matter. This should include as much as possible relevant 
information relating to the laws and rules of procedure applied and applicable and the redress already 
given or course of action available. 
Article 48
If within three months from the date on which the original communication is received by the State to which 
it is addressed, the issue is not settled to the satisfaction of the two States involved through bilateral 
negotiation or by any other peaceful procedure, either State shall have the right to submit the matter to 
the Commission through the Chairman and shall notify the other State involved. 
Article 49
Notwithstanding the provisions. of Article 47, if a State party to the present Charter considers that another 
State party has violated the provisions of the Charter, it may refer the matter directly to the Commission 
by addressing a communication to the Chairman, to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African 
Unity and the State concerned. 
Article 50
The Commission can only deal with a matter submitted to it after making sure that all local remedies, If 
they exist, have been exhausted, unless it is obvious to the Commission that the procedure of achieving 
these remedies would be unduly prolonged. 
Article 51
1. The Commission may ask the States concerned to provide it with all relevant information. 
2. When the Commission is considering the matter, States concerned may be represented before it and 
submit, written or, oral representations. 
Article 52
After having obtained from the State concerned and from other source all the information it deems 
necessary and after having tried all appropriate means to reach an amicable solution based on the 
respect of humane and peoples' rights, the Commission shall prepare, within a reasonable period of time 
from the notification referred to in Article 48, a report stating the facts and its findings. This report shall be 
sent to the States concerned and communicated to the Assembly of Heads of States and Government. 
Article 53
While transmitting its report, the Commission may make to the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government such recommendations as it deems useful. 
Article 54
The Commission shall submit to each ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government a report on its activities. 
OTHER COMMUNICATIONS
Article 55
1. Before each session, the Secretary of the Commission shall make a list of the communications other 
than those of States parties to the present Charter and transmit them to the members of the Commission, 
who shall indicate which communications should be considered by the Commission. 
2. A communication shall be considered by the Commission if a simply majority of its members so decide. 
Article 56
Communications relating to human and peoples' rights referred to in Article 55 received by the 
Commission, shall be considered if they: 
1. indicate their authors even if the latter request anonymity; 
2. are compatible with the Charter of the Organization of African Unity or with the present Charter, 
3. are not written in disparaging or insulting language directed against the State concerned and its 
institutions or to the Organization of African Unity; 
4. are not based exclusively, on news disseminated through the mass media; 
5. are sent after exhausting local remedies, if any, unless it is obvious that this procedure is unduly 
prolonged; 
6. are submitted within a reasonable period from the time local remedies &re exhausted or from the date 
the Commission is seized of the matter, and 
7. do not deal with cases which have been settled by these States involved in accordance with the 
principles of the charter of the United Nations, or the Charter of the Organization of African Unity or the 
provisions of the present Charter. 
Article 57
Prior to any substantive consideration, all communications shall be brought to the knowledge of the State 
concerned by the Chairman of the Commission. 
Article 58
1. When it appears after deliberations of the Commission that one or more communications apparently 
relate to special cases which reveal the existence of a series of serious or massive violations of human 
and peoples' rights, the Commission shall draw the attention of the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government who may request an in-depth study. 
Article 59
1. All measures taken within the provisions of the present Charter shall remain confidential until such a 
time as the Assembly of Heads of State and Government shall otherwise decide. 
2. However, the report shall be published by the Chairman of the Commission upon the decision of the 
Assembly of Heads of State and Government. 
3. The report on the activities of the Commission shall be published by its Chairman after it has been 
considered by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government. 
CHAPTER 4
APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES
Article 60
The Commission shall draw inspiration from International law on human and peoples rights, particularly 
from the provisions of various African instruments on human and peoples' rights, the Charter of the United 
Nations, the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
other instruments adopted by the United Nations and by African countries in the field of, human and 
peoples' rights as well as from the provisions of various instruments adopted within the Specialised 
Agencies of the United Nations of which the parties to the present Charter are members. 
Article 61
The Commission shall also take into consideration, as subsidiary measures to determine the principles of 
law, other general or special international conventions, laying down rules expressly recognized by 
member States of the Organization of African Unity, African practices consistent with international norms 
on human and peoples' rights, customs generally accepted as law, general principles of law recognized 
by African States as well as legal precedents and doctrine. 
Article 62
Each State party shall undertake to submit every two years, from the date the present Charter comes into 
force, a report on the legislative or other measures taken with a view to giving effect to the rights and 
freedoms recognized and guaranteed by the present Charter. 
Article 63
1. The present: Charter shall be open to signature, ratification or adherence of the Member States of the 
Organization of African Unity. 
2. The instruments of ratification or adherence to the present charter shall be deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity. 
3. The present Charter shall come into force three months after the reception by the Secretary-General of 
the instruments of ratification or adherence of a simple majority of the Member States of the Organization 
of African Unity. 
PART III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 64
1. After the coming into force of the present Charter, members of the Commission shall be elected In 
accordance with the relevant Article of the present Charter. 
2. The Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity shall convene the first meeting of 
Commission at the headquarters of the Organization within three months of the constitution of the 
Commission. Thereafter, the Commission shall be convened by its Chairman whenever necessary but at 
least once a year. 
Article 65
For each of the States that will ratify or adhere to the present Charter after its coming into force, the 
Charter shall take effect three months after the date of the deposit by that state of its instrument of 
ratification or adherence. 
Article 66
Special protocols or agreements may, if necessary, supplement the provisions of the present Charter. 
Article 67
The Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity shall inform Member States of the 
Organization of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or adherence. 
Article 68
The present Charter may be amended if a State party makes a written request to that effect to the 
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity. The Assembly of Heads of State and Government 
may only consider the draft amendment after all the States parties have been duly informed of it and the 
Commission has given its opinion on it at the request of the sponsoring State. The amendment shall be 
approved by a simple majority of the States parties. It shall come into force for each State which has 
accepted it in accordance with its constitutional procedure three months after the Secretary-General has 
received notice of the acceptance. 
Adopted by the eighteenth Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African 
Unity, June 1981 - Nairobi, Kenya